----------------------------------------------------------------------
File:    pubcookie-ldap.txt
Descr:   Modifcations made to the Pubcookie Login server and
         Mod_pubcookie code to enable the use of LDAP for user
         authentication.
By:      Russell Tokuyama
Date:    10/11/01
Mod:     
----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1. Overview

     The Pubcookie distribution is set up to use Kerberos or a
     combination of Kerberos and SecurID (from RSA Security). The
     University of Hawaii (UH) does not use Kerberos for user
     authentication.  So we modified the source code for the Pubcookie
     Login server and the Mod_pubcookie Apache module to use LDAP to
     perform user authentication behind the scenes.

     This document covers modifications made to the Login server
     (pubcookie_login-1.22) and Mod_pubcookie (mod_pubcookie-1.55) in
     the Pubcookie distribution.

  2. Site-specific modifications

     As distributed, the Login server and Mod_pubcookie are set up for
     the University of Washington.  Therefore, some site-specific
     modifications are necessary.  They occur wherever University of
     Washington-specific information is sent in the HTML responses.
     These are typically isolated to index.cgi.h and pbc_config.h.

  3. LDAP authentication modifications

     The modifications made by UH were done under RedHat Linux 7.1.

     To use LDAP, you'll need to change the following files for the
     Login server (pubcookie_login-1.22):

       pbc_config.h
       index.cgi.c
       index.cgi.h

     and add:

       index.cgi_ldap.c

     You'll also need to change the following files for the
     Mod_pubcookie module:

       pbc_config.h
       mod_pubcookie.c

     NOTE: pbc_config.h is the same file for both the Login server
           and the Mod_pubcookie module.

     The key changes to enable LDAP for user authentication are:
       a. Add a new authentication type, e.g., UHNetID, to pbc_config.h.

           #define PBC_UHNETID_AUTHTYPE "uhnetid"
           #define PBC_CREDS_UHNETID '4'

       b. Add code to index.cgi.c to recognize and handle the new
          authentication type.  A new function, check_login_uhnetid,
          is also added to call a function, auth_ldap, in a new
          module, index.cgi_ldap.c to perform the user authentication
          using LDAP.

       c. Add a new module to handle the authentication type, e.g.,
          index.cgi_ldap.c.  This module has only one function,
          auth_ldap, that handles all the interaction with LDAP
          directory server.  The site specific details are localized
          in the module.  These specifics are:

          i. LDAP server host name
         ii. LDAP server port number
        iii. LDAP search base
         iv. LDAP attribute used to hold the username or net ID

          index.cgi_ldap.c, which conforms to the way the Kerberos
          (index.cgi_krb.c) and the SecurID (index.cgi_securid.c)
          modules behave.

          NOTE: The LDAP modifications assume that users can be
                looked up anonymously in the directory.  If this
                not the case additional modifications are required
                for index.cgi_ldap.c.

       d. Add a function declaration for auth_ldap in index.cgi.h.

       e. Add the new module to the Makefile.

       f. Copy the pbc_config.h file from the Login server source
          directory to the Mod_pubcookie source directory before
          building Mod_pubcookie.

       g. Add code to the pubcookie_user function in mod_pubcookie.c
          to check for the new auththentication type and set the
          appropriate credentials code in the directory configuration
          data.

  4. Applying the modifications

     A copy of all of the files including the originals in the
     distribution are in a zip file called pubcookie-uh-ldap.zip.

     You will need to modify index.cgi.h to customize the HTML pages
     sent by the Login server for your particular site.

     You need to sort out problems and differences with the library
     files and their location.  This involves changing the
     Makefile.index.cgi.  In some cases, you may need to add header
     files (#include in the C source) for your specific OS.

  5. Security issues

     The second LDAP bind as the user with their password should be
     done using LDAP over SSL.  This is not currently done in
     modifications that were made.  It is strongly suggested that this
     be done.

  5. Copyrights and disclaimers

     You are free to use the source code modifications but can't claim
     you wrote them.  If you do decide to use them, you do so at your
     own risk and responsibility.  Anything bad that happens is not
     the fault of the University of Hawaii nor the author.  The
     University of Hawaii gratefully recognizes the work and
     contribution of the University of Washington in the original
     distribution of Pubcookie it has modified.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
